# Foreset-Fire-Detection-System_WSN-PROJECT

Forest fires are disasters that cause extensive damage to the entire world in economic, ecological, and environmental ways. These fires can be caused by natural reasons, such as high temperatures that can create spontaneous combustion of dry fuel such as sawdust, leaves, lightning, etc., or by human activities, such as unextinguished campfires, arson, inappropriately burned debris, etc1. According to research, 90% of the world’s forest fire incidents have occurred as a result of the abovementioned human carelessness1. The increase in carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere due to forest fires contributes to the greenhouse effect and climate change. Additionally, ash destroys much of the nutrients in the soil and can cause erosion, which may result in floods and landslides.

At earlier times, forest fires were detected using watchtowers, which were not efficient because they were based on human observations. In recent history and even the present day, several forest fire detection methods have been implemented, such as watchtowers, satellite image processing methods, optical sensors, and digital camera-based methods2, although there are many drawbacks, such as inefficiency, power consumption, latency, accuracy and implementation costs. To address these drawbacks, a forest fire detection system using wireless sensor networks is proposed in this paper.

Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are self-configured and infrastructure-free wireless networks that help monitor physical or environmental conditions and pass these data through the network to a designated location or sink where the data can be observed and analyzed3. Efficiency and low power consumption are the major advantages of a WSN. In the proposed detection system, wireless sensor nodes are deployed according to cellular architecture to cover the entire area with sensors to monitor temperature, relative humidity, light intensity level, and carbon monoxide (CO) level using a microcontroller, transceiver module, and power components. The power supply to the sensor node is provided using batteries as the primary power supply, and solar panels are used as the secondary power supply. These sensor nodes are specially designed with a spherical shape to withstand damage caused by environmental conditions as well as animals.

The sensor readings for each parameter are checked with a preset threshold ratio and a ratio that is calculated continuously in the node in real time, and only the ratios that exceed the preset ratio are sent from the sensor node to the base station for further analytical processing. The network utilized for this transmission is in the architecture of tree topology considering facts such as low power consumption, reduced latency, less complexity, etc. Cluster heads are used in this network to gather data from several sensor nodes and pass them on to the base station or the gateway node. The gateway node is an interface that connects the network with the secondary analysis process.

For the analysis process, a machine learning regression model was used along with threshold ratio analysis to enhance detection accuracy. For the training and testing process of the model, data were collected during the fire and no fire situations in different areas and under different climatic conditions. During the data collection process, 7000 data samples were collected, where a data sample included temperature, relative humidity, light intensity level, and CO level at a particular time. Eighty percent of the collected data were randomly used as training data for the model, and the remaining 20% were used as test data.

If the outcome of the machine learning model indicates a fire in a specific area, a text message will be sent to the mobile phone numbers of the authorized officers in responsible units. As this process is designed with a minimum delay, the fire can be detected within the initial stage, and the responsible parties can take necessary actions in a shorter period, which will minimize the damage.
